---
layout: post
title: Reflexivity
---

> **Reflexivity** is a concept referring to circular relationships between cause and effect as each element is both affecting and is being affected by other elements. Especially it refers to a feedback relationship between observer (i.e. intelligent agent) and observed (i.e. environment): any examination and action of agents “bends” the environment and affects the perception and further decisions by the same agents. From its very definition, the sociotechnological system is a reflexive system with a vast number of feedback loops. Reflexivity, blurring the distinction between causes and effects, makes systems difficult to analyze and predict. The contribution of reflexivity to the fragility of the sociotechnological system depends on the kind of feedback mechanisms that operate. A negative feedback has a stabilizing effect on the system's behavior as it resists any change in the state of the system. This is not the case with positive feedback that has the opposite effect of destabilizing the system by amplifying any disturbance. The crucial aspect of the reflexivity property for the sociotechnological system is that patterns of modeling and representation of the world have a decisive effect on the type of feedback loops which develop in it. Consider, for example, a stock market crash caused by a positive feedback: a price of a stock randomly fluctuates down which may bring stressed traders to sell that stock because they predict a further decrease. Which indeed becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy: each sale order further reduces the price and drives an avalanche of sale orders which may eventually crash the stock price.  In all similar cases, reflexivity is clearly a potential amplifier of fragility.[^1]

[^1]: Weinbaum, David, and Viktoras Veitas. [“Synthetic Cognitive Development: Where Intelligence Comes from.”](http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.0159) ArXiv Preprint arXiv:1411.0159, 2014.
